README.md, before:

# MNIST Digit Classifier

A web application for recognizing handwritten digits using a PyTorch model trained on the MNIST dataset. Users can draw digits directly on the interface, receive predictions with confidence scores, provide feedback on the accuracy, and view prediction history.

## Features

- Draw digits on a canvas interface
- Real-time digit recognition using a CNN model
- Prediction confidence visualization
- User feedback collection
- Prediction history logging to PostgreSQL

## Development Setup

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- PostgreSQL 15

### Dependencies

This project uses the following main dependencies:
- **PyTorch (2.2.x)** and **torchvision (0.17.x)**: Deep learning framework for model training and inference
- **Streamlit (1.32.x)**: Web application framework for the user interface
- **streamlit-drawable-canvas**: Component for drawing digits on the web interface
- **psycopg2 (2.9.x)**: PostgreSQL adapter for database interactions
- **Pillow (10.x)** and **NumPy (1.26.x)**: Image processing libraries
- **python-dotenv (1.0.x)**: Environment variable management

All dependencies are pinned to specific versions in `requirements.txt` to ensure reproducibility.

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd mnist-digit-classifier
   ```

2. Create a virtual environment:
   ```bash
   python3 -m venv venv
   ```

3. Activate the virtual environment:
   - On macOS/Linux:
     ```bash
     source venv/bin/activate
     ```
   - On Windows:
     ```bash
     .\venv\Scripts\activate
     ```

4. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   make setup        # Install production dependencies
   make setup-dev    # Install development dependencies
   ```

5. Configure the environment:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env with your PostgreSQL credentials and application settings
   ```

### Environment Variables

The application uses the following environment variables that should be defined in the `.env` file:

| Variable      | Description                      | Example Value            |
|---------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------|
| DB_HOST       | PostgreSQL server hostname       | localhost                |
| DB_PORT       | PostgreSQL server port           | 5432                     |
| DB_NAME       | PostgreSQL database name         | mnist_predictions        |
| DB_USER       | PostgreSQL username              | postgres                 |
| DB_PASSWORD   | PostgreSQL password              | your_password_here       |
| MODEL_PATH    | Path to the trained model file   | models/model.pth         |
| DEBUG         | Enable/disable debug mode        | False                    |

Make sure to configure these variables before running the application.

#### Using Environment Variables in the Application

The application uses the `load_environment_variables()` function from `utils.py` to load these variables:

```python
from utils import load_environment_variables

# Load environment variables
env_vars = load_environment_variables()

# Access variables
db_host = env_vars["db_host"]
db_port = env_vars["db_port"]
model_path = env_vars["model_path"]
```

This function returns a dictionary with snake_case keys containing all the environment variables with appropriate default values. It also handles type conversion (e.g., `db_port` is converted to an integer, and `debug` is converted to a boolean).

### Development Tools

This project uses several development tools to ensure code quality:

- **Black**: Automatic code formatting 
  ```bash
  make format    # Format code with black and isort
  ```

- **Flake8**: Code linting
  ```bash
  make lint      # Run linting checks 
  ```

- **isort**: Import sorting
  ```bash
  # Included in the format command
  ```

- **mypy**: Type checking 
  ```bash
  make type-check  # Run type checking
  ```

- **pytest**: Testing framework
  ```bash
  make test      # Run tests
  ```

### Running the Application

1. Train the model (if not already trained):
   ```bash
   make train
   ```

2. Start the application:
   ```bash
   make run
   ```

3. Open your browser and navigate to http://localhost:8501

## Project Structure

- `app.py`: Main Streamlit application
- `utils.py`: Image preprocessing and model utilities
- `db.py`: Database interactions
- `train.py`: Model training script
- `models/`: Directory for storing trained models

## License

[Insert license information here]

Commit message:

feat: migrate to conda-based setup for cross-platform compatibility
- Added environment.yml for conda environment configuration
- Updated Makefile to use conda commands
- Updated README.md with conda installation instructions
- Removed pip-based requirements files
- Added 'update' command to refresh conda environment

This change resolves dependency installation issues across different operating systems, especially with psycopg2-binary compilation requirements.

README.md, after:

# MNIST Digit Classifier

A web application for recognizing handwritten digits using a PyTorch model trained on the MNIST dataset. Users can draw digits directly on the interface, receive predictions with confidence scores, provide feedback on the accuracy, and view prediction history.

## Features

- Draw digits on a canvas interface
- Real-time digit recognition using a CNN model
- Prediction confidence visualization
- User feedback collection
- Prediction history logging to PostgreSQL

## Development Setup

### Prerequisites

- [Miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/free/miniconda/index.html) or [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/download)
- PostgreSQL 15 (automatically installed in the conda environment)

### Dependencies

This project uses the following main dependencies:
- **PyTorch (2.6.x)** and **torchvision (0.21.x)**: Deep learning framework for model training and inference
- **Streamlit (1.32.x)**: Web application framework for the user interface
- **streamlit-drawable-canvas**: Component for drawing digits on the web interface
- **psycopg2 (2.9.x)**: PostgreSQL adapter for database interactions
- **Pillow (10.x)** and **NumPy (1.26.x)**: Image processing libraries
- **python-dotenv (1.0.x)**: Environment variable management

All dependencies are managed through Conda using the `environment.yml` file.

### Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd MLX_Application
   ```

2. Create and activate the conda environment:
   ```bash
   make setup
   conda activate mlx-app
   ```

3. Configure the environment:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env with your PostgreSQL credentials and application settings
   ```

### Environment Variables

The application uses the following environment variables that should be defined in the `.env` file:

| Variable      | Description                      | Example Value            |
|---------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------|
| DB_HOST       | PostgreSQL server hostname       | localhost                |
| DB_PORT       | PostgreSQL server port           | 5432                     |
| DB_NAME       | PostgreSQL database name         | mnist_predictions        |
| DB_USER       | PostgreSQL username              | postgres                 |
| DB_PASSWORD   | PostgreSQL password              | your_password_here       |
| MODEL_PATH    | Path to the trained model file   | models/model.pth         |
| DEBUG         | Enable/disable debug mode        | False                    |

Make sure to configure these variables before running the application.

#### Using Environment Variables in the Application

The application uses the `load_environment_variables()` function from `utils.py` to load these variables:

```python
from utils import load_environment_variables

# Load environment variables
env_vars = load_environment_variables()

# Access variables
db_host = env_vars["db_host"]
db_port = env_vars["db_port"]
model_path = env_vars["model_path"]
```

### Development Tools

This project uses several development tools to ensure code quality:

- **Black**: Automatic code formatting 
  ```bash
  make format    # Format code with black and isort
  ```

- **Flake8**: Code linting
  ```bash
  make lint      # Run linting checks 
  ```

- **isort**: Import sorting
  ```bash
  # Included in the format command
  ```

- **mypy**: Type checking 
  ```bash
  make type-check  # Run type checking
  ```

- **pytest**: Testing framework
  ```bash
  make test      # Run tests
  ```

### Running the Application

1. Train the model (if not already trained):
   ```bash
   make train
   ```

2. Start the application:
   ```bash
   make run
   ```

3. Open your browser and navigate to http://localhost:8501

## Project Structure

- `app.py`: Main Streamlit application
- `utils.py`: Image preprocessing and model utilities
- `db.py`: Database interactions
- `train.py`: Model training script
- `models/`: Directory for storing trained models
- `environment.yml`: Conda environment configuration

## License

[Insert license information here]
